https://marymcnutt.com/about-mary/

(808) 662-3784  Mary@MaryMcNutt.com
HOME
MEET MARY
GOLDILOCKS
SERVICES
RATES & INSURANCE
MARY’S BLOG
RESOURCES
Contact Us 
About Mary
HOME  ABOUT MARY
100
%
Satisfaction
Guarantee
A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
Meet Mary McNutt,
M.A.
The Voice of Transformation

Mary McNutt is a highly sought-after, results-driven Transformational Life, Business & Personal Development, and Addiction Recovery Coach. For decades, her single mission has been to be a catalyst for profound change.

Her clients describe her as a COACH with a brilliant mind, tremendous compassion, and a deep understanding for those seeking purpose and direction.

Having decades of experience, Mary’s voice in the field of addiction and coaching is built on a solid footings of education and real-world experience:

Helps relieve pain

A Master's in Addiction Studies & Coaching from the world-renowned Hazelden Betty Ford Graduate School, and a Master's in Psychology and Coaching from Saint Mary's University of Minnesota.

Reduce Body Stress

She previously founded and ran her own chemical dependency treatment center, giving her invaluable insight into the healing process.

Mary describes her work as both her passion and her ministry, stepping into the "ring of fire" with her clients to walk alongside them as they heal and learn to live life more fully.
Why Choose Mary 

Throughout her life, Mary has helped those suffering with grief and loss. She is a certified dog therapist, a cancer support group facilitator. Mary is a specialist in relapse prevention and experienced in addressing special needs. Mary has lectured on addiction in Mumbai, India at the Kripa Foundation and in South Africa at the Harmony House.

Mary’s deep faith in a higher power continues to motivate her to bring others to the freedom that sobriety brings. “My profession is my ministry. I can’t stand to see others suffer needlessly when I know how to help them. Alcohol, drugs, and bad behaviors can be put aside and life can be good. It takes discovery of the cause, understanding, compassion and the commitment to sobriety. we can do this and we will, and this will be our lasting legacy to those we love.”

0 +
YEARS OF COACHING EXPERIENCE

Supporting individuals and families on their recovery journey.

0
SUCCESSFUL INTERVENTIONS

Guiding people from crisis to healing.

0 K
THERAPY HOURS COMPLETED

Empowering lives through one-on-one and group sessions.

0 +
RECOVERY PROGRAMS DEVELOPED

Tailored approaches for lasting sobriety.

"As a musician, addiction nearly destroyed my career. Thanks to Mary’s recovery coaching and intervention, I found a new purpose and lasting sobriety."

    
Evangeline lee
HAPPY CLIENT

"Mary helped me break free from years of alcohol addiction. Her guidance and constant support gave me the strength to rebuild my life with confidence."

    
Clarabelle
HAPPY CLIENT

"I was lost in substance abuse, but Mary’s one-on-one therapy made me feel understood and cared for. Today, I’m living a healthy and sober life."

    
Adeline wood
HAPPY CLIENT

"As a musician, addiction nearly destroyed my career. Thanks to Mary’s recovery coaching and intervention, I found a new purpose and lasting sobriety."

    
Scarlett
HAPPY CLIENT

"As a musician, addiction nearly destroyed my career. Thanks to Mary’s recovery coaching and intervention, I found a new purpose and lasting sobriety."

    
Evangeline lee
HAPPY CLIENT

"Mary helped me break free from years of alcohol addiction. Her guidance and constant support gave me the strength to rebuild my life with confidence."

    
Clarabelle
HAPPY CLIENT
Useful Links
Homepage
About Mary
My Methodology
Goldilocks
Services
Rates & Insurance
Mary’s Blog
Addiction and Related Links

Helping individuals find hope, healing, and lasting recovery with care and guidance.

   
Working Time
Monday to Friday
10AM - 4PM
Download The US Department Of Justice Drug And Abuse Guide
© Copyright 2025 Mary McNutt. All Rights Reserved.
Disclaimer
Privacy policy