https://marymcnutt.com/privacy-policy/

(808) 662-3784  Mary@MaryMcNutt.com
HOME
MEET MARY
GOLDILOCKS
SERVICES
RATES & INSURANCE
MARY’S BLOG
RESOURCES
Contact Us 
Privacy Policy
HOME  PRIVACY POLICY
Privacy Policy
Privacy Policy

This privacy policy discloses the privacy practices for marymcnutt.com. This privacy policy applies solely to information collected by this website. It will notify you of the following:

What personally identifiable information is collected from you through the website, how it is used and with whom it may be shared.
What choices are available to you regarding the use of your data.
The security procedures in place to protect the misuse of your information.
How you can correct any inaccuracies in the information.

Information Collection, Use, and Sharing
We are the sole owners of the information collected on this website. We only have access to/collect information that you voluntarily give us via email or other direct contact from you. We will not sell or rent this information to anyone.

We will use your information to respond to you, regarding the reason you contacted us. We will not share your information with any third party outside of our organization, other than as necessary to fulfill your request, e.g. to ship an order.

Unless you ask us not to, we may contact you via email in the future to tell you about specials, new products or services, or changes to this privacy policy.

Cookies
We use “cookies” on this site. A cookie is a piece of data stored on a site visitor’s hard drive to help us improve your access to our site and identify repeat visitors to our site. Cookies enable us to track and target the interests of our users to enhance the experience on our site. Usage of a cookie is in no way linked to any personally identifiable information on our site.

Your Access to and Control Over Information
You may opt out of any future contacts from us at any time.

Security
We take precautions to protect your information. When you submit sensitive information via the website, your information is protected both online and offline.

Wherever we collect sensitive information (such as credit card data), that information is encrypted and transmitted to us in a secure way. You can verify this by looking for a closed lock icon at the bottom of your web browser, or looking for “https” at the beginning of the address of the web page.

While we use encryption to protect sensitive information transmitted online, we also protect your information offline. Only employees who need the information to perform a specific job (for example, billing or customer service) are granted access to personally identifiable information. The computers/servers in which we store personally identifiable information are kept in a secure environment.

Links
This web site contains links to other sites. Please be aware that we are not responsible for the content or privacy practices of such other sites. We encourage our users to be aware when they leave our site and to read the privacy statements of any other site that collects personally identifiable information.

Updates

Our Privacy Policy may change from time to time and all updates will be posted on this page.

If you feel that we are not abiding by this privacy policy, you should contact us immediately via telephone at (808) 662-3784 or via email

Useful Links
Homepage
About Mary
My Methodology
Goldilocks
Services
Rates & Insurance
Mary’s Blog
Addiction and Related Links

Helping individuals find hope, healing, and lasting recovery with care and guidance.

   
Working Time
Monday to Friday
10AM - 4PM
Download The US Department Of Justice Drug And Abuse Guide
© Copyright 2025 Mary McNutt. All Rights Reserved.
Disclaimer
Privacy policy