https://marymcnutt.com/the-twelve-traditions-of-aa/

(808) 662-3784  Mary@MaryMcNutt.com
HOME
MEET MARY
GOLDILOCKS
SERVICES
RATES & INSURANCE
MARY’S BLOG
RESOURCES
Contact Us 
The Twelve Traditions Of AA
HOME  THE TWELVE TRADITIONS OF AA
The Twelve Traditions of AA
The Twelve Traditions of Alcoholics Anonymous
Our common welfare should come first; personal recovery depends upon
A.A. unity.
For our group purpose there is but one ultimate authority—a loving God as
He may express Himself in our group conscience. Our leaders are but
trusted servants; they do not govern.
The only requirement for A.A. membership is a desire to stop drinking.
Each group should be autonomous except in matters affecting other groups
or A.A. as a whole.
Each group has but one primary purpose—to carry its message to the
alcoholic who still suffers.
An A.A. group ought never endorse, finance, or lend the A.A. name to any
related facility or outside enterprise, lest problems of money, property, and
prestige divert us from our primary purpose.
Every A.A. group ought to be fully self-supporting, declining outside
contributions.
Alcoholics Anonymous should remain forever nonprofessional, but our
service centers may employ special workers.
A.A., as such, ought never be organized; but we may create service boards
or committees directly responsible to those they serve.
Alcoholics Anonymous has no opinion on outside issues; hence the A.A.
name ought never be drawn into public controversy.
Our public relations policy is based on attraction rather than promotion; we
need always maintain personal anonymity at the level of press, radio, and
films.
Anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all our Traditions, ever reminding us
to place principles before personalities.


Copyright © 1952, 1953, 1981 by A.A. Grapevine, Inc. and Alcoholics Anonymous Publishing
(now known as Alcoholics Anonymous World Services, Inc.)
All rights reserved.
Rev. 10/14 

Useful Links
Homepage
About Mary
My Methodology
Goldilocks
Services
Rates & Insurance
Mary’s Blog
Addiction and Related Links

Helping individuals find hope, healing, and lasting recovery with care and guidance.

   
Working Time
Monday to Friday
10AM - 4PM
Download The US Department Of Justice Drug And Abuse Guide
© Copyright 2025 Mary McNutt. All Rights Reserved.
Disclaimer
Privacy policy